# nfl_draft_wr_2021
Examining the likelihood of where each wide receiver from the 2021 NFL Draft will be selected

The goal of this project was to build a machine learning model that predicted a wide receiver’s likelihood of being selected in each of the seven rounds of the 2021 NFL Draft. The first iteration of this project was to just look at one position group, so I decided to examine the wide receivers given that there never seems to be a consensus on wide receiver pre-draft rankings.  

The most comprehensive part of this project was gathering and cleaning an extensive amount of publicly available data. The more important factors to predict a player’s success coming out of college were his collegiate statistics, the competition level he faced, and athletic measurables/testing results from the NFL Combine or Pro Day. Obviously, there are other critical factors here that NFL scouts heavily take into consideration that are not able to be measured – injury risk, football character, ability to learn. However, we can still generate a solid prediction and get an idea of a player’s value with the data that we have available.

Below is a short breakdown of each step of the project:

Cleaning Data – 
College football data from 2010-2020 was scraped from the widely known College Football API – collegefootballdata.com. The data is broken down by season stats, so a four-year senior had four records of data for each season. The records had to be aggregated by player to grab that player’s career stats. In addition, statistics from the player’s final season were included in the final data set as well to encompass players that broke out during their final season, which helped elevate their draft stock (i.e., DeVonta Smith from last year). Conference data was also pulled for each player and assigned a rating (SEC being the highest) to factor in level of competition. Lastly, a neutralize function was built to evaluate all players on the same level. For example, schools such as Georgia Tech and Air Force attempted passes about 10 times per game, while schools like Texas Tech and Hawaii threw the ball on average about 60 times per game.

Combine data was scraped from Pro Football Reference. Only players that attended the NFL combine were included in this dataset, since only 2021 wide receivers that were combine invites were going to be tested and projected. Missing combine data for players that did not choose to participate in certain drills was generated through median imputation. Draft data going back to 2011 was also grabbed (credit to Lee Sharpe), which was eventually needed for the dependent variable (which round and which pick the receiver ultimately went). Lastly, feature engineering was implemented to create variables based on athletic testing from the Combine results – speed score, explosion score, quickness score, strength score, catch radius, and an overall athletic score. Other variables such as production score and usage rate were also created based on the player’s raw college stats.


Building the Model – 
Despite the wide receiver college football data going back as far as 2009, only receivers from 2013 onward were included to grab a player’s complete career collegiate stats. The model was created via ordered logistic regression model, which gives a likelihood for each category (round in this project) that a player will belong to. All the independent variables were introduced in a linear model to start just to create a general idea of which variables may be significant. The p-values for each of the independent variables were stored in a separate data frame. In the training model, a loop was instituted, where all variables within a certain p-value range were included in the appropriate iteration of the model. The coefficients and zeta values from the training loop were then applied in the testing loop and the model with the lowest log loss was grabbed as the “best” model. This model was then ran on the entire dataset to grab the final coefficients and final zeta values, which in turn were used on the prediction of the new data – the 2021 wide receiver draft class.


Results – 
A visualization of the results can be found on the main branch of this repository. The results are in fact encouraging as LSU WR Ja’Marr Chase is listed as having the highest probability of being a first round pick (97.6% chance). Chase was in fact picked by the Cincinnati Bengals in the first round at fifth overall. DeVonta Smith and Jaylen Waddle, who were third and fourth respectively in first round draft pick percentage, were also first round selections. In fact, 15 of the top 18 players that the model predicted as having the highest possibility of going in the first round were in fact drafted in the top four rounds in the 2021 NFL Draft. Basically, not only does this model give a percentage likelihood of each player by round, but also gives a pretty accurate description of the top players of this wide receiver class in order.

One notable miss from the model appears to be Florida WR Kadarius Toney, who was selected 20th overall in the first round by the New York Giants; the model gave Toney only a 19.8% chance of being a first round draft pick, signifying that Toney was potentially a reach in that slot. However, the model’s only significantly miss was on Illinois WR Josh Imatorbhebhe, who tested through the roof at his Pro Day. Imatorbhebhe was given a 45.4% chance of going in the first round (and only 2.4% chance of going undrafted), but was signed as an undrafted free agent by the Jacksonville Jaguars. Imatorbhebhe played in one preseason game with the Jaguars before being released by the club. The visualization plot also located on the main branch of the repo also shows just how big of an outlier that Imatorbhebhe was. 

